# Proposal

Ideological polarization is often a consequence of societal complexification.
The ideological progression of societies is often, but not always, related to
the progression of a society’s technology. Communication technologies in
general, and the internet particular, have the potential to amplify the natural
human tendency to share experiences and learn from others by expanding the
network of individuals available for information sharing to include everyone
with access to an internet connection. The early internet functioned this
way—think of the giddy limitlessness of 90s chatrooms—but the trend over the
last decade, heralded and championed by Facebook, has been away from creating
new networks in favor of expanding existing networks and reaffirming the ties
that bind those networks. In recent years it seems that even network expansion
has slowed, leaving only an ever deepening divide between groups, without an
effective conduit for inter-group communication, let alone the formation of the
new and wholly unpredictable internet relationships of those halycyon pre-Y2K
years. A host of factors are undoubtedly at play in this transition, from the
rise of internet trolls, to the factionalization and polarization of seemingly
every facet of the internet, but I believe that these issues go hand in hand
with the development of self-selecting online grouping. The main avenue for
stranger-stranger interaction at the current stage of the internet is the
comment section, which functions as a ubiquitous embedded chatroom that has
lost any respectability it might once have had due to its susceptibility to
trolling and the rarity of commenters ([good youtube comment:view ratio based on
google search of same- 1:200](http://tubularinsights.com/3-metrics-youtube-success/)).  

I view the relationship between network deepening and network creation as a
useful binary for considering ideological polarization. In my opinion, the
internet is saturated with social media tools that enable people to connect
with like-minded people, but lacks tools that enable people to connect with
opposite-minded people. We propose to address this problem by creating a
platform through which individuals can identify their ideological leanings and
be paired with opposite-minded people who would like to discuss their
differences using a chat roulette model of participant-pairing. There are
several ways that this pairing could be accomplished—we have considered a
series of questions with an opt-out at any point to just get to dicks already
(think 20 questions, honing in on the desired topic), or possibly a
questionnaire to be filled out in full before first use and then allowing the
user to select the area they would like to discuss, but something along those
lines—but ultimately the goal is to provide a debating/conversational
interaction between strangers that could be tailored to get at topics as
specific or as broad as desired. The aim is to lay the groundwork for
network-building by facilitating face-to-face interactions between individuals
who would otherwise never get the chance to listen to the rationale of their
ideologically-opposed counterparts, in hopes of disrupting the ‘other’-ization
of outgroups that seems to be accelerating in every other corner of the
internet.  We realize that this idea is not troll-proof, that it in fact begs
to be trolled. We view that as a positive. By incorporating the afore-mentioned
questionnaire we believe we can accommodate the desires of both bombastic,
name-calling reaction-seekers and those interested in actually considering
opposing viewpoints. One of the most appealing aspects of this idea is its
scalability—a Portland user interested in speaking to an Arkansawyer about
their views on abortion could follow that up with a conversation with a fellow
Portlander about rent control. It could function locally and nationally,
facilitating conversations at every level. Another intriguing idea is arranging
debates between well-known figures and letting audiences watch them. Slavoj
Zizek and Francis Fukuyama debate Hegelian progress and the meaning of history.
I’d watch that.  We have discussed a number of ideas about which we’ve been
very excited, but we believe that this idea of a debate roulette has the
potential to be useful and popular, and is a clear idea that can be worked out
with our combination of enthusiasm and skills. I believe the core idea is
solid, and I look forward to seeing it in action.
